---
title: "Career change Part 1"
date: "2020-08-14"
teaser: "https://www.elegantthemes.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/top11.png"
excerpt: "Thoughts and decisions which made me pursue a career in Web Development"
author: "Sebastian Golbert"
---

### Introduction

Welcome to my homepage and blog! First of all, let me introduce myself. My name is Sebastian Golbert and I am a Data Science graduate (a.k.a. Data Scientist) and Web Developer. I was born in Argentina but I live in Germany since 2013. Before deciding to become a web developer, I've had experiences in other disciplines, **far away** from software development. In this post I want to relive this journey together, understanding each step that took me to this great career.

### Studying Biology

Every story has to start somewhere, sometime. And this story might as well start just after finishing high school, at the end of 2002. Although I went to a school specialized in Economics (as much specialized as an institute for teenagers can be), I've always been interested in mathematics and natural sciences. Therefore I was deciding between careers like Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science or Engineering. **Molecular Biology** was getting a lot of attention at the moment and I attended a series of talks by well-known Argentinian biologists such as [Alberto Kornblihtt](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alberto_Kornblihtt) and [Lino Barañao](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lino_Bara%C3%B1ao). That got me super interested and the expectations in the field were extremely high, advancements like **gene therapy** were thought to be just around the corner. As a result I enrolled in the introduction course for the Biology career of [Universidad de Buenos Aires](https://exactas.uba.ar/ensenanza/carreras-de-grado/ciencias-biologicas/), which took place next year.

Before going forward with my career, I'd like to discuss two points. The first one is the university introductory course itself. At Universidad de Buenos Aires there are one year introductory courses for all careers, in which basic knowledge necessary for pursuing a university career is taught. In the case of Biology it consisted of courses on Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics. These courses actually have an upper high school level and have the goal of compensating for a lacking secondary education. For that reason, it is considered a wasted year by a lot of people, although in my case it was useful, as I was effectively lacking in natural sciences. Aside of whether these courses are useful or not, their mere presence as an entrance requisite for careers that are five and a half years long make obtaining a university title in Argentina a very lenghty process, with absurdly high desertion rates and average study times close to ten years.

The second point I want to bring to the table is my initial rejection of a career in Computer Science, but for that I have to give a little more background information. Already since I was a child I've been interested in computers, and I've had the luxury of having a computer from a very early age. If I remember correctly, I was about nine years old when I received my first computer, a **386 running MS-DOS**. Although most of the time I was using it for games, I've had my first programming experiences in the form of *batch files* using the *norton utilities* library for cool effects. Unfortunately I didn't continue with this hobby in high school (or any other hobby besides RPG PC games for that matter), but at the time of choosing my university career I knew that I was good at programming, or at least that I could learn to do it quite effortlessly. But back then I had quite a limited and erroneous image of programmers. I thought that programmers sat at the computer alone all day, staring at the screen (and I am talking about **CRT** monitors), with close to none social interaction. If you compare that image with the study of life itself, you can see why I made that decision. However, if I had better information, I could have taken a shortcut to software development much earlier.

Going back to the matter at hand, lets skip forward to the year 2006. By then I had completed the introductory course and the first one and a half years of the Biology career. I took a course called "Introduction to Cellular and Molecular Biology" which was awesome, but then I was disappointed by the zoology and botany ones. Additionally, I've taken chemistry courses which were pretty good. Back then the image of an industry biologist was almost non-existent, so that the biology career was research oriented only. Taking that into consideration, I decided to switch to Chemistry, which offered more varied career options. As a chemist it was possible to work both on research and industry, possibly in the biological chemistry area. It turned up that the price to pay for this versatility was that the career was relatively unfocused, going too deep in a lot of areas that were not interesting (this applies to most traditional university careers btw).

### Studying Chemistry and Graduation

Once I switched to Chemistry, I continued until graduation, which was in the year 2011. I can recall the following important events during those years:
- I started working part-time as a teaching assistant in the subjects of Inorganic and Organic Chemistry, which was a wonderful experience and gave me money for personal expenses.
- I took my first course on Statistics, more specifically in Biometry. This was a great change from the chemistry courses and would influence my career later on.
- I enrolled myself in the Computer Science career! (in Argentina university is free and it's possible to do any number of careers at the same time). I did this as a hobby, without the intention of completing the studies. However, in retrospective I've had way more fun with the CS subjects, but at the time I wanted to complete my chemistry studies and was still not ready to change.  

After graduating I started working by recommendation of a friend in a research group concerning spectrometry. I was working for free, waiting for a fellowship that didn't succeed. To tell you the truth, I should have known by then that spectrometry and experimental research wasn't the best area for me. I have always liked the data analysis parts of scientific work, but I failed to recognize early enough that I dreaded laboratory work. This realization would be important later on, but to continue at this point in time, I was without fellowship and only working part-time as teaching assistant. I decided then to make the jump to industry!

### Working in QC and moving to Germany

For three months I had interviews at different companies and ended up accepting a position as quality control analyst in a clinic offering PET and other tomographies. The position was particular in the sense that I was taking the place of the previous chief of Quality Control, without being formally responsible for the area. In practice, I worked together with a QC technician and the chief of Quality Assurance to get the work done. I liked the position quite a bit, but after some months the tasks became repetitive and the working hours very long.

Changing the topic slightly, in 2009 I started learning German as extracurricular course at the university. Earlier that year I visited friends from my parents who live in Germany and back in Argentina I decided to study the language. I already had the idea of migrating or working in Germany back then, possibly getting a job at a German company in Argentina. It turned out that I also really liked the language and its complex grammar, which motivated me to continue the courses each year.

Back to my QC position, I was getting tired and wanted to move to a new job. But I actually wanted a bigger change in my life, I wanted to move to Germany! The plan was to continue working at the clinic to save up money, and then go to Germany to do a language course at the end of the year. I also applied to do Master studies at German universities (I can't remember exactly which ones) and to a number of PhD positions. Having been denied a PhD fellowship in my own country once, I wasn't expecting any positive response. But it turned out that I received an invitation for a Skype interview with a research group from the Ruhr university in Bochum!

I've had the interview while on holidays in the south of Argentina, at the mountains in the middle of the winter. The position involved ionic liquids and spectrometry, for which my previous research position was relevant. The interview went apparently well, although to tell the truth my knowledge of spectrometry was (and still is) quite poor. I got the position and was to move to Bochum in three months time! I still can't seem to fully understand why I was chosen. I've had little experience in either of the areas (I had spectroscopy experience in my CV, but from work that didn't result in any publication or significant result). To be perfectly honest, I would have failed a deep technical test. It could also be that it was an international fellowship, open to EU- and non-EU candidates but closed to Germans. Another possibility is that the recruiter, a fellow post-doc, did a poor job and screened only a couple of applications. But whatever the reason, I was going to Germany with a good salary and the perspective of completing my academic education!

As you might expect, things didn't turn out that good for my PhD studies. There is a reason for which my homepage says "Full Stack Developer" instead of "Sebastian Golbert, PhD - Material Scientist". But my adventures in Germany (including one year living in Holland) will be told in a later post, keep in touch!